in this lesson we're talking about how
plants are classified plants are
classified into two main categories
nonvascular and vascular the first
category we're going to look at is non
vascular but before we do that let's
look at a review of what vascular tissue
is vascular tissue is a system of
tube-like structures inside a plant
through which water minerals and food
move if we look at the picture on the
next page these flowers have changed
colors due to vascular tissue you can
see that their stems and the in this
plant the stem has been split into two
half of the stem is in the cup of blue
water half the stems in the cup of red
water the stem that is in the red water
has the red water has gone through the
vascular tissue little tubes inside the
stem made of xylem and phloem tissue and
the red water has gone up the side of
the stem into that side of the flower
you can see the stem on the right has on
the opposite has brought blue water up
that half of the stem and that flower
has turned blue that is all a result of
vascular tissue but not all plants have
vascular tissue so let's take a look at
some examples of plants that are
nonvascular plants plants that do not
have that vascular tissue if you look in
the photo here this is moss growing on
the ground and up the sides of these
trees another example down here this is
moss growing on a rock and it has
grounds some reproductive structures
that we'll talk about in a minute so
moss is an example of a non vascular
plant
nonvascular plants have no cell walls
there's no roots they're usually low
growing and they live in damp shady
places if we look at a diagram of a moss
plant a moss plant like all nonvascular
plants the water does not pass from the
roots up through all parts of the plant
like it does in a plant that has
vascular tissue instead all parts of the
plant absorb water and materials
directly from their surroundings you can
see Moss has a plant part called a ride
and it kind of looks like a root and its
job just like a roots job is to anchor
the Moss in place and it does absorb
water and nutrients but instead of
flowing through vascular tissue up
through all parts of the plant it just
passes from cell to cell
the leaf light can stem like structures
can also absorb water and materials
though - another example of a plant that
it has non vascular tissue are these
things called liver works and they're
given their name oops sorry about that
they're giving their name based on the
fact that they look like the inside of a
liver and just like moss they're found
growing in wet areas damp areas areas
that are shady a lot of times along the
sides of creeks and other streams and
rivers on rocks it can grow right into
the soil but they look like this they
are liver works there are also these
things called horn works and these are a
little bit different they do not have
vascular tissue just like the other two
examples but they're different because
they don't grow on rocks or tree trunks
they're more likely to be found mixed in
with grass and you can see these are the
little horn works trucks
here on page 91 in your book go ahead
and label these three boxes your label
labeling them parts of the mas look at
the diagram on the left here and then
label these boxes and draw a line from
the label to the structure you're
labeling the capsule the stalk and the
leaf like structure in these three
blanks on page 92 I want you to fill in
this chart here we're summarizing the
three types of nonvascular plants mosses
liverworts and hornworts they've filled
in mosses for you and so what this chart
is identifying is physical
characteristics of each of these so
mosses they kind of have a fuzzy
appearance liver words what what is
their appearance what do they look like
if you could describe that here look in
the paragraph up here and that tells you
what the comparison is as to what liver
works look like same for horn words
describe what they look like again use
the wording up here to help you
the second column I guess third column
where these three types of nonvascular
plants are found mosses are found in
shady spots on rocks and tree trunks
again look at the top of the page where
would we find liver words and then
finally where would we find hornworts
and just a hand horn words are found in
a different location than the first two
then go down to the assess your
understanding if you could answer one a
vascular tissues or arise woods anchor
moss and absorb water and nutrients
which one is that circle the correct
choice 1b and remember you can
this at any time to write down your
answers why are most nonvascular plants
short I'm gonna help you out on this one
remember we said that in the text it
says that nonvascular plants do not have
cell walls cell walls are a second layer
of plant cells that make them stronger
so most nonvascular plants are short
because they don't have the extra cell
wall that makes them more sturdy so
they're not as strong they can't grow as
tall how our liver works and a horn
works different you should be able to
use the chart right above here to answer
that how do they look differently and
think about also how they I'm sorry
where they grow that is also different
for those two the I get it question you
can find that answer the bold statement
on page 90 will help you answer this one
now I know the characteristics of
nonvascular plants are finished that
statement using the bold key point on
page 90